---
layout: post
lang: en
permalink: /minimum-marine-distances/
comments: true

title: "Determine minimum marine distances along coastlines"

type: "code"
language: "r"
featured: "true"

description: "An implementation in R to determine minimum marine distances along coastline points"

mainImage: C3.png

date: 2021-03-23T10:00:00Z

---

Unlike measuring pairwise terrestrial distances, marine distances need to account for landmasses, which cannot be crossed. Marine distances are a crucial predictor in genetics to build isolation by distance models. These measure gene frequencies variation under increasing geographic distances.

When marine distances are plotted against pairwise genetic differentation levels, a linear relationship is expected. Here we provide a straightforward R script to determine minimum marine distances.

<h5>How it works?</h5>

A high-resolution polygon representing global landmasses is converted into an infinite resistance surface. Minimum distances between sites are computed with a shortest path algorithm considering the (infinite) resistance of landmasses and null resistance throughout the marine surface.

The outcome of the following code is a matrix of pairwise distances, a figure to visualize if sites are well represented in the surface area and a figure depicting an example of a minimum marine distance.

<h4>Prerequisites</h4>

High resolution polygon depicting the surface of the world (e.g., Global Self-consistent Hierarchical High-resolution Shorelines; https://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/mgg/shorelines/gshhs.html)

<div style="padding: 20px" class="border-radius-05 bg-gray font-family-secondary font-small text-dark">

# Source the main function<br>
source("https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jorgeassis/marineDistances/master/Script.R")<br><br>

# Read the landmass polygon<br>
global.polygon <- "Global_CostLine_HD_Polygon.shp"<br><br>

## Run the function<br>
contour( global.polygon = global.polygon , file= "Data/sampling_sites.txt" , file.sep = ";" , file.dec = "." , file.strucutre = 1 , file.header = FALSE , resolution = 0.01 , buffer = c(1,1,1,1) , export.file = TRUE )<br><br>

## file : the main file with the locations; should be text delimited<br>
## global.polygon: the path of the polygon<br>
## file.strucutre: the main file structure: 1 to “Name Lon Lat” or 2 to “Name Lat Lon”<br>
## file.header: define if the text file has a header with the column names (TRUE or FALSE)<br>
## resolution: the resolution of the study area and the buffer to use around the sites.<br>
## buffer: the buffer can be a simple value or a vector such as c(xmin,xmax,ymin,ymax).<br>
## export.file: file to export the results as a text delimited file (TRUE or FALSE)

</div>

<h4>Main citation</h4>

Assis, J., Castilho Coelho, N., Alberto, F., Valero, M., Raimondi, P., Reed, D., Serrão, E. A. (2013). High and Distinct Range-Edge Genetic Diversity despite Local Bottlenecks. PLoS ONE, 8(7), e68646.
